---
title: Traditional Stories
nav: Traditional Stories
gallery: true
---

## Events

{% include gallery-figure.html img="geo_banner.gif" alt="Title card with a photo of the author and an image fading betweeen an archival photo and a Google Map 3D rendering of the Rowena Loops Overlook in Oregon" caption="Presentation Transcript and Slides for the 2024 U of I Information Landscape Series" title="Presentation Transcript and Slides for the 2024 U of I Information Landscape Series" %}

Most histories of the Inuit and descriptions of their culture that I have read begin with the crossing of the Alaska-Russia land bridge, but I want to start somewhere else. The following is the story of the first Inuit, as told in South Baffin Island.

{% capture text %}
At Padli there lived a man whose name was Apasinasee. He had a daughter who did not want to take a husband.

Finally, her father grew angry and said to her one evening, “You who do not want to take a husband, why not marry my dog?”

His daughter did not reply. Early in the morning, he spoke to her in the same way, but his daughter remained silent. The following night a man came into the hut who wore trousers of red dog skin. He sat down next to the girl and then lay down with her. He copulated with her and then when he left the hut then next morning, he dragged her along, as dogs do. It was her father’s dog that had assumed the shape of a man.

That day, the father said to his daughter, “Now you have a husband.”

During the day the dog did not enter the house, but in the evening the same man with the dog-skin trousers appeared and sat down with the girl.

Thus they continued to live for some time, and the woman soon found herself with child. Eventually, her time came and she gave birth to a litter of young dogs. When they began to grow up, they made a great deal of noise and the woman’s parents grew tired of them. Her father took the young woman, the pups, and the dog to a small island. He told the dog to come back across every day to fetch meat for his family. The young woman hung a pair of boots around his neck and, after her father had filled them with meat, the dog swam back to the island.

They continued to live in this manner for some time, but finally the old man became tired of supplying the young dogs with meat, One day, when the dog came across, he filled the boots with stones and covered the top with meat. The dog began to swim back, as he always did. But when he was halfway to the island the weight of the rocks began to pull him under. As he struggled, he cried out because he wanted to reach his wife and pups very badly. When the dog reached the bottom of the sea, Sedna took him into her house.

The woman was then all alone with her dogs on the island, and the old man went across regularly to supply her with seal meat. Finally, he complained to his daughter, saying that he was tired of supplying the pups with meat. She became angry and resolved to avenge the death of her husband.

She said to here pups, “When my father comes back, go down to the beach and lap the seal blood off the cover of his kayak. Then attack him and devour him.”

When the father arrived, bringing meat for the pups, they ran down to the beach and lapped the blood off the cover of the kayak. The old man scolded them, and tried to drive them away. Then they attacked him and devoured him, as they had been told to do.

The woman felt sorry for her pups, because she had no food for them. She took the sole of one of her boots, made masts of whalebone and transformed it into a ship. She then gathered provisions for their journey.

She told some of her children to go aboard, and said, “Whatever country you may reach, you will make things beautiful for yourselves. You are crying for food all the time and I have nothing to give you.”

When a fair wind from the north began to blow, she pushed the ship offshore and the pups sailed away over the ocean. It is not known to what place they went. 

Then she sent more of her children and said, “Go inland and live on caribou.”

They became the Ijiqat. They are much larger than men and live on caribou only. She sent forth still another part of her brood and told them to go away.

“You may eat anything you find.” She said to them.

They became the Inuarudligat. They are about as high as the knee of a man but are very strong and can drag a walrus up to their tent. They use the ears of a fox for their children’s dress. The last of the brood stayed with the woman and became the ancestors of the Inuit. 
{% endcapture %}
{% include alert.html text=text color="light" %}

The term Inuit refers to similar, but culturally distinct groups across Alaska, Canada, Greenland, and Russia. The Inuit Circumpolar Council, a large non-government organization that represents the Inuit as whole, defines the term in their Charter as, “indigenous members of the Inuit homeland recognized by Inuit as being members of their people and shall include the Inupiat, Yupik (Alaska), Inuit, Inuvialut (Canada), Kalaalit (Greenland) and Yupik (Russia),” (Inuit Circumpolar Council, 1977). Inuit have a shared language, Inuktitut, but there are differences in dialect across the Arctic. It’s important to not think of the Inuit as a specific tribe, but rather a collection of groups who share a common cultural identity. If you are familiar with American Indigenous history, it might help to draw a parallel between a cultural group, for example Great Plains peoples, and the many tribes who fall under that category. It’s also important to not talk about Inuit in the past tense, as people who once inhabited the far north, but as people who are still there, living and adapting to new conditions and challenges. Today, there is an estimated 180,000 Inuit identifying people (Williamson 2024).

Since the term Inuit is so broad, I felt that there was a possibility that discussing traditional stories might be too overwhelming of a task. What I discovered was that while there are certainly regional differences in traditional stories, and regional exclusive stories, there is also remarkable cohesion, even across great distances. Knud Rasmussen, a part Inuit and Danish explorer who grew up in Greenland, discovered this during his most famous Arctic expedition, called the Fifth Thule Expedition. While he was in Canada, he met a group of inland Inuit, and upon conversing with them, “found that they had many traditions in common with the Greenland Eskimos; indeed, a number of their folk-tales and legends are altogether identical with Greenland stories. Out of fifty-two stories which I wrote down among the Padlermiut at Hikoligjuaq, no fewer than thirty were identical with ones I had already heard in Greenland, and this despite the fact that for thousands of years past, no intercourse had taken place between the two groups of people.” Others that were not identical had similarities in theme and subject (Rasmussen 1927, 87-88). This passage from Across Arctic America assured me that traditional Inuit storytelling could be appropriately and respectfully discussed as a whole, without having one small group’s traditions speak for the others.
	Traditional Inuit life, before the arrival and changes brought about by the Quallunaat, was centered around subsistence activities, following the migration of food sources, the observance of strict taboos, and a shamanistic and vivid religious tradition. The main sources of food were often marine animals like seals, walruses, and saltwater fish, hunted on kayaks with harpoons. They also hunted land animals, like caribou and sea birds (Williamson 2024). In the summer many hunted caribou, either with bows and arrows or by funneling them into a body of water, where hunters on kayaks would kill them with harpoons (Rasmussen 1927, 68). Every part of the animal was used, and sharing food was a sign of respect. The common idea was that animals gave themselves willingly to hunters, and that showing respect to your catch would ensure other animals would give themselves to you as well. Because so much of the day-to-day life was centered around subsistence, many traditional stories feature hunters and discuss the origin of animals. Interestingly, many stories blend the line between the two camps, including Inuit who transform into animals and vice versa, which we saw with the first story we looked at, and will time and time again. A story about the origin of the ptarmigan includes both themes.
	This story begins with a little boy who refuses to fall asleep.
	“Grandmother, tell me a story!” the little boy asked.
	“Go to sleep, I have no story,” replied his grandmother.
	“Grandmother, tell me a story!” the little boy said again.
	“From there, from there, from the little corner of the tent, came a little lemming that had no hair at all, that went under a person’s armpit.”
	The grandmother tickled the boy, and he turned into a bird, then flew away.
	His grandmother called out, “Grandson, grandson! Where is he, where is he?”
	The child and his grandmother became ptarmigans. The peculiar cry of these birds is interpreted as “Nauk, aauk” (“Where, where?”) which is an imitation of the grandmother’s cry. The red mark over the eye of the ptarmigan is said to be the result of the grandmother’s weeping for her grandson.
	This story also serves as a warning to children who do not listen to their elders.
	Their main mode of transportation was dogsleds, which would take Inuit families to the source of food most abundant at the time. They built igloos, semisubterranean houses, or animal skin tents depending on climate, season, and region. Life centered around nuclear families, the mother and father pairing usually being arranged by their parents, but things like adoption, polygyny, and wife-swapping were common. Because of the importance of marriage for communities to survive, marriage, it’s importance, and the punishment of those who refuse to marry, are prominent themes in traditional stories, as we saw in the first story.
Life in the Arctic was governed by taboo, or a set of specific rules that one must follow. The specific rules that governed life changed by region, so what was taboo among one group might be fine among another. Breaching of these rules threatened the wellbeing of the perpetrator, and sometimes the entire group. Professor of Inuit Studies at Queen’s University, Noel Christopher et al., summarized the idea of taboo well in the introduction to his book Unikkaaqtuat. “There were rules governing every single aspect of life: childbirth, naming, death, eating, sewing, hunting, and so on. As one might expect, a large number of taboos revolved around the proper care and treatment of animals without which Inuit could not survive,” (Christopher et al. 2011, 20). Inuit believed that animals willingly gave themselves to their hunters, and the hunter’s job was to show respect to his catch, often times so that the soul of the animal would think positively about the hunter and tell other animals to be caught. The purpose of observing many taboos was to avoid upsetting Sedna, the sea goddess, who controlled the weather and sea animals. If upset, Sedna could withhold animals from hunters. “Taboos varied from group to group but they all had the same purpose: to ensure good weather and hunting by avoiding offending the spirits that controlled and inhabited the same world as Inuit,” (Christopher et al. 2011, 20). The following is the story of Sedna, the Mother of the Sea Mammals, as recorded in the Netsilik region of Canada. Sedna is a prominent figure in Inuit folktales, and the details of her story vary region to region, but she is nevertheless known everywhere. 
Everything came from the ground. In the past, people lived on the ground. They ate rocks and dirt, as we now eat animals. But, back then, there were no animals to hunt. And people knew nothing of all the strict taboos that we have to observe now. For no dangers threatened them. On the other hand, no pleasures awaited them after a long day’s toil.
Then one day, as people from a village were crossing a fjord in a raft made with kayaks tied together, a little orphan girl was pushed into the sea. It was just the same as with the thunder and lightning. Nobody cared about the orphan girl and, as she hid on the kayak-raft, she was pushed into the sea. But that wickedness turned her into a great spirit, the greatest of all the spirits. She became Nuliajuk and made the animals that we hunt. Now everything comes from her – everything people love or fear – food and clothes, hunger and bad hunting, abundance or lack of caribou, seals, meat, and blubber. Because of her, people have to forever think out all the taboos that make life difficult. For now people can no longer live eating rocks and dirt. Now we depend on timid and cunning animals.
Nuliajuk is another name for Sedna. This story also references another story, where two mistreated orphans become lightning and thunder. In other versions, Sedna is a woman who refuses to marry.
Another story from the same region explains how the Inuit learned the proper taboo for when a bear is killed.
In the time when there was no difference between humans and animals, their speech was nearly the same. Animals had their own expressions, but otherwise spoke like Inuit, except that their speech was in dialects, as if from a distant and foreign country
A story is told of a woman who once sought refuge in a bear’s dwelling. There she heard bear speech, and from the events she witness there she taught people how important it is that the proper taboo is observed when bears are killed. For if a bear’s soul is shown the proper respect, the soul will live on and a new bear will be born. It even happens that bears are grateful at having been killed by humans, for the presents that are made to their souls pass to them in the next life.
An excerpt from a story recorded in Greenland describes the price for breaking the taboo of murder.
When he was out seal catching, a fox set his teeth fast in the lappet of his coat and Pautusorssuaq, thinking it an ordeinary fox, swung at it, but could not hit it. It turned out that this fox was actually the soul of the murdered Alattaq. Alattaq’s amulet was a fox, you see.
	A short time afterward, Pautusorssuaq was torn to pieces by Alattaq’s spirit, in the shape of a bear. His daughter, who happened to be outside at that time, heard the shrieks and went in to tell the others, but as soon as she got inside, fshe forgot what she wanted to say, because the avenging spirit had conjured forgetfulness upon her.
	It was only later that she remembered, and then it was too late. They found Pautusorssuaq, torn limb from limb; they could see that he had tried to defend himself with great lumps of ice, but it had been of no avail.
	That is how revenge comes upon people who murder.
An important figure in traditional Inuit society was the angakok, usually translated to shaman. The first angakok that Rasmussen met on his expedition was named Aua, who described his duties. Chief among them, was ensuring the observances of taboos. Aua was able to tell when someone had broken a taboo, and there was an associated ritual with the confession of a broken taboo. It was also Aua’s job to, when faced with famine, go to Sedna and ask her to provide the hunters with marine animals (Rasmussen 1927, 18-35). The exact procedures, rituals, duties, and even the process to become an angakok changed with each one Rasmussen met. In traditional stories, angakok have other abilities, including living as animals and bringing inanimate objects to life. A story recorded in the Netsilik region of Canada describes one angakok’s experience living the life of various animals.
There once was a great shaman who wanted to see what it was like to live the life of all animals. So, he let himself be reborn in all kinds of animals. For a time he was a bear. That was a tiring life; bears were always walking, even in the dark they roamed about, always on the wander.
Then he became a fjord seal; the seals were always in the humour for playing. They were ever full of merry jests and they leaped about among the waves, frolicsome and agile, till the sea began to move. Their high spirits set the sea in motion.
At that time there was not much difference between humans and seals, for the seals could suddenly turn themselves into human shape. When in human form they were skilful with the bow and amused themselves by setting up targets to shoot at, targets of snow, just as men make them.
Once the shaman was a wolf, but then he almost starved to death until one of the wolves took compassion on him and said, “Get a good hold of the ground with your claws and try to keep up with us when we run.” He did this from then on and so he learned to run and catch caribou.
Then he turned into a muskox, and it was warm in the middle of the big herds, he said.
Afterward he became a caribou. They were strangely restless animals, always timid; in the middle of their sleep they would spring up and gallop away. They became scared at nothing and so there was no fun in being a caribou.
In this way the shaman lived the life of all animals. This took place in times long ago, when animals often were humans. People believe that there was a time when there was not much difference between an animal’s soul and a human’s soul. All living things were very much alike.	
	

